
copy-object
***********


DESCRIPTION
===========

Creates a copy of an object that is already stored in Amazon S3.


SYNOPSIS
========

   aws s3 copy-object
     --copy-source <value>
     --key <value>
     --bucket <value>
     [--copy-source-if-modified-since <value>]
     [--copy-source-if-unmodified-since <value>]
     [--content-encoding <value>]
     [--storage-class <value>]
     [--grant-read-acp <value>]
     [--server-side-encryption <value>]
     [--content-disposition <value>]
     [--metadata <value>]
     [--website-redirect-location <value>]
     [--expires <value>]
     [--cache-control <value>]
     [--grant-read <value>]
     [--grant-write-acp <value>]
     [--acl <value>]
     [--grant-full-control <value>]
     [--copy-source-if-match <value>]
     [--content-type <value>]
     [--content-language <value>]
     [--metadata-directive <value>]
     [--copy-source-if-none-match <value>]


REQUIRED PARAMETERS
===================

"--copy-source"  (string)The name of the source bucket and key name of
the source object, separated by a slash (/). Must be URL-encoded.

"--key"  (string)

"--bucket"  (string)


OPTIONAL PARAMETERS
===================

"--copy-source-if-modified-since"  (timestamp)Copies the object if it
has been modified since the specified time.

"--copy-source-if-unmodified-since"  (timestamp)Copies the object if
it hasn''t been modified since the specified time.

"--content-encoding"  (string)Specifies what content encodings have
been applied to the object and thus what decoding mechanisms must be
applied to obtain the media-type referenced by the Content-Type header
field.

"--storage-class"  (string)The type of storage to use for the object.
Defaults to 'STANDARD'.

"--grant-read-acp"  (string)Allows grantee to read the object ACL.

"--server-side-encryption"  (string)The Server-side encryption
algorithm used when storing this object in S3.

"--content-disposition"  (string)Specifies presentational information
for the object.

"--metadata"  (map)A map of metadata to store with the object in S3.

   *Parameter Syntax*

      {
        "string": "string"
        ...
      }

"--website-redirect-location"  (string)If the bucket is configured as
a website, redirects requests for this object to another object in the
same bucket or to an external URL. Amazon S3 stores the value of this
header in the object metadata.

"--expires"  (timestamp)The date and time at which the object is no
longer cacheable.

"--cache-control"  (string)Specifies caching behavior along the
request/reply chain.

"--grant-read"  (string)Allows grantee to read the object data and its
metadata.

"--grant-write-acp"  (string)Allows grantee to write the --acl for the
applicable object.

"--acl"  (string)The canned --acl to apply to the object.

"--grant-full-control"  (string)Gives the grantee READ, READ_ACP, and
WRITE_ACP permissions on the object.

"--copy-source-if-match"  (timestamp)Copies the object if its entity
tag (ETag) matches the specified tag.

"--content-type"  (string)A standard MIME type describing the format
of the object data.

"--content-language"  (string)The language the content is in.

"--metadata-directive"  (string)Specifies whether the metadata is
copied from the source object or replaced with metadata provided in
the request.

"--copy-source-if-none-match"  (timestamp)Copies the object if its
entity tag (ETag) is different than the specified ETag.
