.TH xtree 1 2012-12-11 "xtree"
.SH NAME
xtree \- Gather files scattered across several subdirectories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xtree [-h] [--separator [|]] [--no-separator] [--purge]
.B [--directory | --tarball | --zipfile] archive
.SH DESCRIPTION
xtree can easily convert an archive or a directory populated by a lot of
nested subdirectories into a flat tree structure, or the other way round.
.PP
This is particularly useful to move files scattered across a lot of
subdirectories into a single directory, or to move files grouped by
a common pattern into corresponding subdirectories.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --separator
Specify which separator to use when gathering files in a single
directory. Separator must not be part of the full file path of any file
to be considered valid, otherwise xtree will prompt an error message.
Default separator is the pipe ( | ).
.TP
.B --no-separator
Do not use separator to gather files in a single directory. There must
not be files with the same name, otherwise xtree will prompt an error.
.TP
.B --purge
Delete newly created elements on exit. Original files are always kept.
.TP
.B --directory
Clearly specify selected archive is a directory, bypassing MIME detection
feature.
.TP
.B --tarball
Clearly specify selected archive is a tarball, bypassing MIME detection
feature. Supported tarball types are gzip and bzip2.
.TP
.B --zipfile
Clearly specify selected archive is a zipfile, bypassing MIME detection
feature.
.TP
.B --help
Show help message and exit.
.SH COPYRIGHT
This manual page is Copyright 2012 Luca Falavigna <dktrkranz@debian.org>.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public License, Version 3 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation.
