
Amazon Relational Database Service (Beta)
*****************************************


DESCRIPTION
===========

Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS) is a web service that
makes it easier to set up, operate, and scale a relational database in
the cloud. It provides cost-efficient, resizable capacity for an
industry-standard relational database and manages common database
administration tasks, freeing up developers to focus on what makes
their applications and businesses unique.

Amazon RDS gives you access to the capabilities of a familiar MySQL or
Oracle database server. This means the code, applications, and tools
you already use today with your existing MySQL or Oracle databases
work with Amazon RDS without modification. Amazon RDS automatically
backs up your database and maintains the database software that powers
your DB Instance. Amazon RDS is flexible: you can scale your database
instance's compute resources and storage capacity to meet your
application's demand. As with all Amazon Web Services, there are no
up-front investments, and you pay only for the resources you use.

This is the *Amazon RDS API Reference* . It contains a comprehensive
description of all Amazon RDS Query APIs and data types. Note that
this API is asynchronous and some actions may require polling to
determine when an action has been applied. See the parameter
description to determine if a change is applied immediately or on the
next instance reboot or during the maintenance window. To get started
with Amazon RDS, go to the Amazon RDS Getting Started Guide . For more
information on Amazon RDS concepts and usage scenarios, go to the
Amazon RDS User Guide .


Available Commands
==================

* add-source-identifier-to-subscription

* add-tags-to-resource

* authorize-db-security-group-ingress

* copy-db-snapshot

* create-db-instance

* create-db-instance-read-replica

* create-db-parameter-group

* create-db-security-group

* create-db-snapshot

* create-db-subnet-group

* create-event-subscription

* create-option-group

* delete-db-instance

* delete-db-parameter-group

* delete-db-security-group

* delete-db-snapshot

* delete-db-subnet-group

* delete-event-subscription

* delete-option-group

* describe-db-engine-versions

* describe-db-instances

* describe-db-parameter-groups

* describe-db-parameters

* describe-db-security-groups

* describe-db-snapshots

* describe-db-subnet-groups

* describe-engine-default-parameters

* describe-event-categories

* describe-event-subscriptions

* describe-events

* describe-option-group-options

* describe-option-groups

* describe-orderable-db-instance-options

* describe-reserved-db-instances

* describe-reserved-db-instances-offerings

* list-tags-for-resource

* modify-db-instance

* modify-db-parameter-group

* modify-db-subnet-group

* modify-event-subscription

* modify-option-group

* promote-read-replica

* purchase-reserved-db-instances-offering

* reboot-db-instance

* remove-source-identifier-from-subscription

* remove-tags-from-resource

* reset-db-parameter-group

* restore-db-instance-from-db-snapshot

* restore-db-instance-to-point-in-time

* revoke-db-security-group-ingress
