======================
Command Line Interface
======================

# The Command Line Interface Shell and Adminstration of the Domain Model #

## Prerequisites ##

This howto assumes basic knowledge of python. If you are unfamiliar with python
please visit http://www.python.org/

## Getting Started ##

First import kforge and get the application object::

    >>> from kforge.soleInstance import application

The Application object holds everything you need to manage the KForge
application including the domain model. You can take a look at it by doing::

    >>> help(application)

## Registers ##

To administer the domain model you will want to use the registry attribute::

    >>> application.registry

The registry holds registers (lists) of domain objects which are keyed by a
unique identifier (an id, a unique name or even another domain object).
Registers provide a dictionary like interface to the domain objects that they
hold and are also the means by which to create new domain objects.

The best way to see how this works is by an example. Suppose we wish to enable
a plugin called 'myplugin' for which the code is already installed (see the
KForge guide) by creating the associated domain object::

    >>> plugins = application.registry.plugins
    >>> plugins.create('myplugin')

If successful the result of the final statement should be to print a string
representation of the plugin domain object just created. It will look something
like: <Plugin id='<some-int>' services='[]' ..... >

If you now wanted to get the plugin object you have just created you can do::

    >>> myplugin = plugins['myplugin']

Remark: As stated above a registry provides a dictionary like interface to
obtain the domain objects that it holds. Thus you can do::

    >>> if 'myplugin' in plugins:
    >>> ...

Unlike a dictionary their default iterator is an iterator over values *not*
key, value pairs::

    >>> for pluginobject in plugins:
    >>> ....

Once you have a domain object you can manipulate it in various ways. Taking a
different example::

    >>> admin = application.registry.persons['admin']  # person registry is keyed by (user)name
    >>> admin.__dict__  # show list of attributes
    >>> admin.name      # username
    'admin'
    >>> admin.fullname
    'Administrator'
    >>> admin.email
    ''                  # does not yet have an email
    >>> admin.dateCreated   # note the value you get will almost certainly be different
    datetime.datetime(2006, 6, 3, 23, 5, 16)
    >>> admin.memberships  # this is a registry of memberships keyed by project

If you want to update a domain object you just set the attribute and save::

    >>> joe = application.registry.persons['joebloggs']
    >>> joe.fullname
    'Joe Bloggs'
    >>> joe.fullname = 'Joe Bloggins'
    >>> joe.save()  # until you call save the change won't be saved to the database

You can also delete domain objects::

    >>> joe.delete()

Note that some domain objects are 'stateful' and some are not. If a domain
object is stateful then it can be in 2 states: active/deleted. When you delete
a stateful domain object it is put in the deleted state and will not appear in
a register. To completely remove a stateful domain object you have to purge
it. For example Person objects are stateful so to fully remove one you need to
do::

    >>> joe.delete()
    >>> joe.purge()

For non-stateful domain objects (e.g. License) delete() is sufficient to
completely remove the object, e.g.::

    >>> license = application.registry.licenses['BSD'])
    >>> license.delete()

An alternative is to use the dict-style pop() syntax:

    >>> session = application.registry.sessions.pop(key)

Another alternative is to use the "list delete" syntax::

    >>> del application.registry.sessions[ key ]



## Compound Registers ##

Registers to hold all kinds of lists not just those associated with all domain
objects. For example instead of all services

    >>> application.registry.services  # key by id

You might want all services for a given project:

    >>> myproject = application.registry.projects['myproject']
    >>> myproject.services

Here myproject.services is a register that only contains the services
associated with that project. More examples of usage are provided below.

### Example 1: Create a new service for a project ###

Creating a service is relatively complicated because it brings together the
project, the plugin with which the service is associated and the service
itself::

    >>> myproject = application.registry.projects['myproject']  # keyed by name of project
    >>> myplugin = application.registry.plugins['myplugin']
    >>> myservice = myproject.services.create(name='newservice', plugin=myplugin)

### Example 2: Updating the role of a member of a project ###

    >>> myproject = application.registry.projects['myproject']  # keyed by name of project
    >>> myperson = application.registry.projects['myperson']
    >>> application.registry.roles.keys()   # get a list of the role (names) available
    ["Administrator", "Developer", "Friend", "Visitor"]
    >>> newrole = application.registry.roles['Administrator']  # make them an Administrator
    >>> membership = myproject.members[myperson] # members registry is keyed by person object
    >>> membership.role.name  # print the name of the current role
    'Developer'
    >>> membership.role = newrole
    >>> membership.save()

