Introduction
============

collective.referencedatagridfield is a mix of Reference and DataGrid fields for
Plone.  This is a sophisticated reference field with its own widget for adding
and deleting references for both internal and external resources. Having
complete support for Archetype's Reference field functionality, it also allows
external links management.

This package functionality is based on DataGridField, DataGridWidget and
Archetype's Reference field with ATReferenceBrowserWidget. It allows Plone
developers to extend default Plone Reference field functionality or override
existing Reference field functionality with a custom one. 

Required Products.DataGridField package is automatically installed during
installation procedure.

Usage
-----

This package can be used for extending Plone default Related content
functionality. Apart from possibility to add related items from the current
website, collective.referencedatagridfield allows to:

* add custom title to the related item instead of its real title add external
* sources as related items 

Development
-----------

This product was developed by Quintagroup for Plone collective, sponsored by
Headnet company http://headnet.dk/.

Supported Plone Version
-----------------------

Plone 4.0 - 4.2

Use Case
--------

There is an example of simple content type creation with a mix of Reference and
DataGrid fields as related items included into the package:
http://svn.plone.org/svn/collective/collective.referencedatagridfield/trunk/collective/referencedatagridfield/examples/ReferenceDataGridDemoType.py

With this package your content types might get sophisiticated related items
field: include related items from the current site and external ones.

1. *Internal Links* - to insert internal link use 'Add...' button and browse
your site for the necessary object you want to add.  Type in desirable title
into the Title field. If you leave it empty - it will automatically be filled
with the inserted object title.

2. *External Links* - to insert external links type in external URL into the
Links field. Type in full address with  http:// protocol.  In case your URL is
not correct it will not be saved. Type in desirable title into the Title field.
If you leave it empty - it will get title the same as URL.

Author
------

* Andriy Mylenkyy
* Roman Kozlovskyi
* Volodymyr Cherepanyak

Thanks
------

* gauthier_bastien
* emasker

Links
-----

* SVN Repository - http://svn.plone.org/svn/collective/collective.referencedatagridfield
* Documentation - http://projects.quintagroup.com/products/wiki/collective.referencedatagridfield


