
describe-spot-instance-requests
*******************************


DESCRIPTION
===========

Describes Spot Instance requests. Spot Instances are instances that
Amazon EC2 starts on your behalf when the maximum price that you
specify exceeds the current Spot Price. Amazon EC2 periodically sets
the Spot Price based on available Spot Instance capacity and current
spot instance requests. For conceptual information about Spot
Instances, refer to the Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud Developer Guide
or Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud User Guide .

You can filter the results to return information only about Spot
Instance requests that match criteria you specify. For example, you
could get information about requests where the Spot Price you
specified is a certain value (you can't use greater than or less than
comparison, but you can use "*" and "?" wildcards). You can specify
multiple values for a filter. A Spot Instance request must match at
least one of the specified values for it to be included in the
results.

You can specify multiple filters (e.g., the Spot Price is equal to a
particular value, and the instance type is "m1.small" ). The result
includes information for a particular request only if it matches all
your filters. If there's no match, no special message is returned; the
response is simply empty.

You can use wildcards with the filter values: an asterisk matches zero
or more characters, and "?" matches exactly one character. You can
escape special characters using a backslash before the character. For
example, a value of "\*amazon\?\\" searches for the literal string
"*amazon?\" .


SYNOPSIS
========

   aws ec2 describe-spot-instance-requests
     [--spot-instance-request-ids <value>]
     [--filters <value>]


REQUIRED PARAMETERS
===================

None


OPTIONAL PARAMETERS
===================

"--spot-instance-request-ids"  (list of string)
   The ID of the request.

   *Parameter Syntax*

      ["string", ...]

"--filters"  (list)
   A list of filters used to match properties for SpotInstances. For a
   complete reference to the available filter keys for this operation,
   see the Amazon EC2 API reference .

      (structure)
         A filter used to limit results when describing tags. Multiple
         values can be specified per filter. A tag must match at least
         one of the specified values for it to be returned from an
         operation.

         Wildcards can be included in filter values; "*" specifies
         that zero or more characters must match, and "?" specifies
         that exactly one character must match. Use a backslash to
         escape special characters. For example, a filter value of
         "\*amazon\?\\" specifies the literal string "*amazon?\" .

         "values"  (list of string)
            Contains one or more values for the filter.

         "name"  (string)
            Specifies the name of the filter.

   *Parameter Syntax*

      [
        {
          "values":
            ["string", ...],
          "name": "string"
        }
        ...
      ]
