
describe-instance-status
************************


DESCRIPTION
===========

Describes the status of an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2)
instance. Instance status provides information about two types of
scheduled events for an instance that may require your attention:

* Scheduled Reboot: When Amazon EC2 determines that an instance must
  be rebooted, the instance's status will return one of two event
  codes: "system-reboot" or "instance-reboot" . System reboot commonly
  occurs if certain maintenance or upgrade operations require a reboot
  of the underlying host that supports an instance. Instance reboot
  commonly occurs if the instance must be rebooted, rather than the
  underlying host. Rebooting events include a scheduled start and end
  time.

* Scheduled Retirement: When Amazon EC2 determines that an instance
  must be shut down, the instance's status will return an event code
  called "instance-retirement" . Retirement commonly occurs when the
  underlying host is degraded and must be replaced. Retirement events
  include a scheduled start and end time. You're also notified by
  email if one of your instances is set to retiring. The email message
  indicates when your instance will be permanently retired.

If your instance is permanently retired, it will not be restarted. You
can avoid retirement by manually restarting your instance when its
event code is "instance-retirement" . This ensures that your instance
is started on a healthy host.

"describe-instance-status" returns information only for instances in
the running state.

You can filter the results to return information only about instances
that match criteria you specify. For example, you could get
information about instances in a specific Availability Zone. You can
specify multiple values for a filter (e.g., more than one Availability
Zone). An instance must match at least one of the specified values for
it to be included in the results.

You can specify multiple filters. An instance must match all the
filters for it to be included in the results. If there's no match, no
special message is returned; the response is simply empty.

You can use wildcards with the filter values: "*" matches zero or more
characters, and "?" matches exactly one character. You can escape
special characters using a backslash before the character. For
example, a value of "\*amazon\?\\" searches for the literal string
"*amazon?\" .

The following filters are available:

* "availability-zone" - Filter on an instance's availability zone.

* "instance-state-name" - Filter on the intended state of the
  instance, e.g., running.

* "instance-state-code" - Filter on the intended state code of the
  instance, e.g., 16.


SYNOPSIS
========

   aws ec2 describe-instance-status
     [--max-results <value>]
     [--next-token <value>]
     [--include-all-instances ]
     [--filters <value>]
     [--instance-ids <value>]


REQUIRED PARAMETERS
===================

None


OPTIONAL PARAMETERS
===================

"--max-results"  (integer)The maximum number of paginated instance
items per response.

"--next-token"  (string)A string specifying the next paginated set of
results to return.

"--include-all-instances"  (boolean)

"--filters"  (list)The list of filters to limit returned results.
      (structure)
         A filter used to limit results when describing tags. Multiple
         values can be specified per filter. A tag must match at least
         one of the specified values for it to be returned from an
         operation.

         Wildcards can be included in filter values; "*" specifies
         that zero or more characters must match, and "?" specifies
         that exactly one character must match. Use a backslash to
         escape special characters. For example, a filter value of
         "\*amazon\?\\" specifies the literal string "*amazon?\" .

         "values"  (list of string)
            Contains one or more values for the filter.

         "name"  (string)
            Specifies the name of the filter.

   *Parameter Syntax*

      [
        {
          "values":
            ["string", ...],
          "name": "string"
        }
        ...
      ]

"--instance-ids"  (list of string)The list of instance IDs. If not
specified, all instances are described.

   *Parameter Syntax*

      ["string", ...]
