
AWS Data Pipeline
*****************


DESCRIPTION
===========

This is the *AWS Data Pipeline API Reference* . This guide provides
descriptions and samples of the AWS Data Pipeline API.

AWS Data Pipeline is a web service that configures and manages a data-
driven workflow called a pipeline. AWS Data Pipeline handles the
details of scheduling and ensuring that data dependencies are met so
your application can focus on processing the data.

The AWS Data Pipeline API implements two main sets of functionality.
The first set of actions configure the pipeline in the web service.
You call these actions to create a pipeline and define data sources,
schedules, dependencies, and the transforms to be performed on the
data.

The second set of actions are used by a task runner application that
calls the AWS Data Pipeline API to receive the next task ready for
processing. The logic for performing the task, such as querying the
data, running data analysis, or converting the data from one format to
another, is contained within the task runner. The task runner performs
the task assigned to it by the web service, reporting progress to the
web service as it does so. When the task is done, the task runner
reports the final success or failure of the task to the web service.

AWS Data Pipeline provides an open-source implementation of a task
runner called AWS Data Pipeline Task Runner. AWS Data Pipeline Task
Runner provides logic for common data management scenarios, such as
performing database queries and running data analysis using Amazon
Elastic MapReduce (Amazon EMR). You can use AWS Data Pipeline Task
Runner as your task runner, or you can write your own task runner to
provide custom data management.

The AWS Data Pipeline API uses the Signature Version 4 protocol for
signing requests. For information about how to sign a request with
this protocol, go to Signature Version 4 Signing Process . In the code
examples in this reference, the Signature Version 4 Request parameters
are represented as AuthParams.

*Note: This is pre-release documentation and subject to change.*


Available Commands
==================

* activate-pipeline

* create-pipeline

* delete-pipeline

* describe-objects

* describe-pipelines

* evaluate-expression

* get-pipeline-definition

* list-pipelines

* poll-for-task

* put-pipeline-definition

* query-objects

* report-task-progress

* report-task-runner-heartbeat

* set-status

* set-task-status

* validate-pipeline-definition
